I’ll start by saying I have worked in a factory that makes glass bottles for the past decade and these findings do not surprise me at all. Although the cap is undoubtedly a factor, particularly with highly pressurized bottles, I highly doubt the cap is putting enough micro plastics in our foods and beverages to be at a higher level than that of a plastic bottle. However…. after the forming process, there are several coatings applied to the glass and there are many inspection and packaging processes that seem to be standard across the industry where microplastics may enter containers.

First, right after forming while the bottles are still glowing hot, there is a tin coating (you do NOT want to breathe that stuff in!) that is haphazardly applied that most definitely also makes its way into the bottles. This coating somewhat “fuses” to the glass due to their temperature. After that they take a trip through a lehr, which is essentially a giant oven, where there are temperature zones that slowly cool the bottle to avoid fractures from a more natural cooling process. Then, after the bottles have cooled to about 300 F a final coating is applied. This is one place where I believe micro plastics come into play, but it does depend on the coating that is applied. 

Our company has 4 different coatings that can be used, AP5, Glaskin, Oleic, and duracoat… the latter otherwise known in the plant as… wait for it… POLY! Guess which one we use the most and works the best! I welcome you to research each of these coatings individually because I wouldn’t be sure that the first three are any better than the plastic. Oleic acid is at least naturally occurring… but I’d be shocked if the formulation of that spray was simply oleic acid and water. Glaskin was essentially phased out in our plant. I will say that AP5, like the tin coating, is applied as a general mist or fog that assuredly finds its way into bottles. Not sure what it even is. Non-AP5 coatings are essentially sprayed out of small fancy paint guns that atomize the liquid on its way out. There is an ATTEMPT to ensure this spray is “below the finish” which is the top most part of a bottle with the opening. 

However the process is imprecise enough that our poly and other sprays definitely find their way into bottles. Not to mention that sometimes the spay heads malfunction from wear or by getting clogged to a point wear they are no longer spraying their proper pattern below the finish. Its like putting your thumb over a garden hose. Other times, due to the constant desire to increase production, the bottles are so close together on the lehr that a spray head will not realistically travel between rows without hitting the bottles. In these cases, sometimes we will spray juuust above the finish, to make sure our bottles are good and upright and to make sure you are eating delicious poly or if you’re lucky, other questionable chemicals. And thats just the forming process! 

Next the bottles enter the dirty cold end where they are poked and prodded for quality purposes. i can tell you that it is very dusty and dirty in this part of the plant. There are so many moving parts, many made of plastic, that the air itself turns into a giant dusty soup. There are plastic and rubber belts, sprockets, conveyers, finish rollers, finish plugs, brakes, foam wheels, yada yada yada all of which wear down over time. Some of which purposefully contact the finish or even enter the bottle to check for defects or for other purposes. All these wear parts and bottle integrity tests assuredly fling micro plastics all over the place, adding more material to the already substantial box and organic matter dust, some of which ends up in your next bud light. Keep in mind that these processes happen very fast, 200-300 bottles per minute in some cases. Imagine rigging your favorite glass bottle to the end of an electric drill and attempting to drill into your linoleum floor. Okay that may be a bit of a shock value exaggeration but its not THAT far off… let’s just say the soup is stirred.

Lastly, time for Packing! On some lucky bottles a plastic coated brake comes directly down on top of the bottles, so they can stop to watch and let their fellow more lucky bottles enter their pallet tier or box. Many boxes, coated in plastic, check! Plastic tier sheet laid (and often times scrapped!) directly across the tops of the finishes, check! And then for good protective measure, saran wrap the entire damn pallet, check! As pallets are moved around the warehouse, loaded into trucks and shipped, the plastic tier sheets between rows that is in direct contact with finishes probably sheds a little. These pallets are banded tight (with plastic) to the point where the finishes will make indentations on the tier sheets above. Essentially forcefully scrapping plastic over the tops of the bottles. Sometimes we use cardboard tier sheets but don’t be surprised if that nice coating on them… is plastic!

Now time for some philosophy from your neighborhood glass plant mechanic. I guess the point is here that plastic has been very useful to humans for one too many things, including making glass. It’s too cheap, and too useful for businesses in almost all if not all industries to use. Inventing plastic was a milestone in human existence but hopefully we can find a way to forget it. In a greater likelihood, we will find a way to evolve with it, but there will be some bumps along the way. Call it pride or perhaps stupidity but after everything I just explained…. I STILL sit down at a bar and ask for my favorite beer… in a beautiful glass bottle. 🍻  